Main Page:

What is Encryption and Decryption:

Cryptography is the process of securing information that will be sent from one individual to another
only allowing the people intened to see the message to understand it. Cryptography works with designing
and solving codes to better protect and secure the trasfer of data.


Encryption is a process of converting plaintext(readable text) into another form of unintelligible writing that is unreadable. 

Decryption is the reverse process of encryption where unintelligible writing is converted back into readable text through the use of a key.



Page 1: How encryption works 

There are two main methods that are used to encrypt and decrypt data. 

Symmetric Cryptography:  In Symmetric Cryptography there is a single key used to both encrypt and 
decrypt the data being transfered. When the sender encrypts their data is is locked with a key 
to keep the data unreadable and out of the hands of the general public. The key is then transfered to the
message is intened for and they use this key to unlock the data and decrypt it making it readable again.

Pros: Symmetric Cryptography is fast and efficient taking little to no time to encrypt and decrypt

Cons: Having only one key is a secuirty risk. If the key is lost or stolen, an outside source now has access
to your messages even if they are encrypted. 


Asymetric Cryptography: Asymetric Cryptography is also known as public key encryption. Within Asymetric
Cryptography two keys are used. The first key is a public key that the general public has access to.
Everyone can see this key and when you want to send a message to another person, you take their public key
and encyrpt your message with it. The second key is the private key. This key is never shared and held onto
by only the sender. When they recive a message encrypt by their public key found onoine, they use their
private key to decrypt the message and see the original content sent by the original source.

Pros: Asymetric Cryptography is much more secure. There is no need to transer keys so it keeps your
data secure so that only the people who are intened to recive the information actually get it.

Cons: Due to the extra steps of using 2 keys the encryption process is over a million times slower
than Symmetric encryption. 


Why do we use Cryptography to encrypt data?

One benifit to using Cryptography is that is allows your data to remain confidential. Through encryption
only authorized people are allowed to access the data.

Another benifit is Data integrity and Authentication are protected. Digital Signatures help allow us to
know exactly where the data came from and that it has come intact from the sender with no thrid party changes.



Page 2: Methods Used:

Ceaser Cipher: Ceaser Chipher is a simple type of encryption that uses substitution to shift the
letters in a sentence to something else. Before the encryption begins a shift value is implemented to
alter the sentence. This shift value works as the key. From there the sentence is broken up letter by letter and
shifted down the alphabet the amount of times as the shift value. A shift value of 2 would make the letter A turn into C 
and a value of 3 would make the letter C turn into F. If the shift passes the letter Z the process just begins
again from letter A.


AES: AES is also known as Advanced Encryption Standard which uses a symmetric block cipher which takes a block of letters and
and encrypts the message block by block. Each block size is 128 bits which is the largest that have been created yet.
These blocks are encrypted using keys that are 128, 192 and 256 bits. Each block is given a differnet key and they are paired together. 
These encrypted blocks are then added togther and put into one longer ciphertext. When it reaches its destination the blocks are decrypted 
one at a time and the user is left with the original message.
